[WIP] Podman (#2370)
alan-turing-institute/the-turing-way: book/website/reproducible-research/renv/renv-containers.md

That person can then use the image to generate a container containing a working version of the project.

(rr-renv-containers-docker)=
## Docker

(rr-renv-containers-whatdocker)=
### What is Docker?

There are many tools available for creating and working with containers.
We will focus on [Docker](https://www.docker.com/), which is widely used, but be aware that others such as [Apptainer](http://apptainer.org/), [LXC](https://linuxcontainers.org/), [Podman](https://podman.io/), [Singularity](https://sylabs.io/singularity/) also exist.
Apptainer and Singularity are designed with a focus on high-performance computing and tend to be well supported and preferred on such systems.
Podman may be seen as a completely free and open-source alternative to Docker.

> It has a Docker compatible command line interface and can run Docker container images.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
It has a Docker compatible command-line interface and can run Docker container images.
```

The following prequisites, which are part of the [`shadow-utils`](https://github.com/shadow-maint/shadow) package are required to run Docker rootless: `newuidmap` and `newgidmap`.

(rr-renv-containers-podman)=
## Podman

> [Podman](https://podman.io/) is an open-source container engine that can be seen as a compelling alternative to Docker.

Reviewer 2: Just flagging that we do say "lightly" opinionated guides, so perhaps another, lighter adjective than "compelling" to be used here ;)

Author: Any suggestions? Meaningful?

I think I want to emphasise that there may be strong reasons for choosing Podman over Docker despite the interface being very similar.

Author: Fixed in [4e773c0](https://github.com/alan-turing-institute/the-turing-way/pull/2370/commits/4e773c0533d6363bdfd336054ce3181d83c59346)

> In fact, Podman provides a Docker-compatible command line interface.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In fact, Podman provides a Docker-compatible command-line interface.
```

> For most use cases a user familiar with Docker can simply alias the Docker command to Podman (`alias docker=podman`) and carry on as normal.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For most use cases, a user familiar with Docker can simply alias the Docker command to Podman (`alias docker=podman`) and carry on as normal.
```

> Podman includes a [full set of tools](https://docs.podman.io/en/latest/Commands.html) to create, run and manage and share containers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Podman includes a [full set of tools](https://docs.podman.io/en/latest/Commands.html) to create, run, manage, and share containers.
```

Podman is free and open-source software released under the Apache License 2.0.

> This is in contrast to Docker which has some open-source components, such as the engine and command line interface, but also develops closed-source, [subscription-requiring](https://www.docker.com/blog/updating-product-subscriptions/) software including the Docker Desktop clients for MacOS and Windows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is in contrast to Docker which has some open-source components, such as the engine and command-line interface, but also develops closed-source, [subscription-requiring](https://www.docker.com/blog/updating-product-subscriptions/) software, including the Docker Desktop clients for MacOS and Windows.
```

All [Open Container Initiative](https://opencontainers.org/) container images can be used with Podman including Docker images hosted on Docker Hub.
It is likely existing projects using Docker can be migrated to Podman.

Unlike Docker which uses a daemon running as root, Podman is daemonless.
Unprivileged users can run containers using Podman.
In most cases this will be configured automatically.

> This avoids a problem with the standard Docker configuration where users able to run containers have implicit access to the Docker daemon.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This avoids a problem with the standard Docker configuration where users can run containers with an implicit access to the Docker daemon.
```

Author: I think this changes the meaning of the sentence.

I want to explain how in the 'normal' Docker setup adding a user to the docker group is essentially giving them a high-level of access to the host with a very simple route to privilege escalation. For example,

```
docker run --mount=type=bind,source=/,destination=/host -it busybox
```

Maybe it would be worth explaining that properly instead of alluding to it?

Reviewer: Thank you Jim, for the clarification! I think it's only me who couldn't understand it, English isn't my 1st language but I think you can ignore this comment - I think I can remove the suggestion from my side.

Author: No problem. On reflection I think it is unclear because it is hinting at something with properly explaining it. I have added the example above as a note in [5c3c907](https://github.com/alan-turing-institute/the-turing-way/pull/2370/commits/5c3c907c947879e4560bdc4b1927982be8bfab51) :+1:

This is as simple as two commands per user who should be able to run Podman.

(rr-renv-containers-commandspodman)=
### Podman Commands

Podman has a Docker-compatible command line interface so those commands will not be reiterated here.
The Docker commands in the {ref}`key commands <rr-renv-containers-commands>` should all work by substituting `sudo docker` with `podman`.
Details of all commands and their options can be found [in the Podman documentation](https://docs.podman.io/en/latest/Commands.html).

(rr-renv-containers-imagespodman)=
### Building Container Images

Podman can build container images using the `podman build` command.
Podman will build images from either Dockerfiles or Containerfiles.
Containerfiles use the same format as Dockerfiles, which are discussed in {ref}`Writing Dockerfiles <rr-renv-containers-dockerfiles>`

(rr-renv-containers-rootlesspodman)=
### Rootless Containers

Rootless containers are containers run by a normal user (not using `sudo` or with the `root` account).
These containers never have more privileges than the account that runs them.

> This is an strong security advantage to rootless containers compared to running containers as root or through the Docker daemon.

Reviewer 2: Update
"This is an strong security advantage **to** rootless containers compared to running containers as root or through the Docker daemon"
TO
"This is an strong security advantage **for** rootless containers compared to running containers as root or through the Docker daemon"

Author: Fixed in f4f92383dcfceea7427138b6c4072f7b4191b235
